docs: Avalanche consensus rewrite (#1360)
ava-labs/avalanche-docs: docs/learn/avalanche/avalanche-consensus.md

:::

If a sufficient majority of the validators sampled reply with the same preferred
transaction, this becomes the preferred choice of the validator that inquired. 

In the future, this node and all those who have participated in at least one round of sampling
will reply with the transaction preferred by the majority.

The validator repeats this sampling process until a sufficiently large portion of the validators
queried reply with the same answer for a certain number of consecutive rounds.

- The number of validators required to be considered a "sufficient majority" is referred to as "α" (_alpha_).
- The number of consecutive rounds required to reach consensus, a.k.a. the "Confidence Threshold,"
is referred to as "β" (_beta_).

When a transaction has no conflicts, finalization happens very quickly. When
conflicts exist, honest validators quickly cluster around conflicting transactions, entering a
positive feedback loop until all correct validators prefer that transaction. This leads to the
acceptance of non-conflicting transactions and the rejection of conflicting transactions.

![How Avalanche Consensus Works](/img/howavalancheconsensusworks.png)

> Avalanche Consensus virtually guarantees that if any honest validator accepts a transaction,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avalanche Consensus guarantees that if any honest validator accepts a transaction,
```

---

> description: Avalanche is a new consensus protocol that is scalable, robust, and decentralized.

Reviewer: While we're changing this: should we still describe it as "new" given that it came out in 2019?

> description: Avalanche is a new consensus protocol that is scalable, robust, and decentralized.

Reviewer: While we're changing this: should we still describe it as "new" given that it came out in 2019?

---

# Avalanche Consensus

Consensus is the task of getting a group of computers (a.k.a. nodes) to come to an agreement on a decision.
In blockchain, this means that all the participants in a network have to agree on the changes made to
the shared ledger. This agreement is reached through a specific process, a consensus protocol,
that ensures that everyone sees the same information and that the information is accurate and trustworthy.

> **Avalanche Consensus** is a new consensus protocol that is scalable, robust, and decentralized. It

Reviewer: same question re: "new"

Author: addressed

combines features of both classical and Nakamoto consensus mechanisms to achieve high throughput, 
fast finality, and
energy efficiency. For the whitepaper, see [here](https://www.avalabs.org/whitepapers). 

Key Features Include: 

- Speed: Avalanche consensus provides sub-second, immutable finality, ensuring that transactions are
quickly confirmed and irreversible.

> - Scalability: Capable of a peak throughput of up to 20,000 transactions per second with a latency

Reviewer 2: > Capable of a peak throughput of up to 20,000 transactions per second

On [the 5-23-23 Dev Community call, @ 21:29](https://www.youtube.com/live/HD3vdZzraE8?feature=share&t=1289), POG announced 50K TPS

of less than half a second.
- Energy Efficiency: Unlike other popular consensus protocols, participation in Avalanche consensus

> is not computationally intensive nor expensive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is neither computationally intensive nor expensive. 
```

attacks, distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks, and collusion attacks. Its probabilistic
nature ensures that the consensus outcome converges to the desired state, even when the network
is under attack. 

![Consensus Comparison](/img/Consensus-protocol-comparison.png)

## Conceptual Overview

Consensus protocols in the Avalanche family operate through repeated sub-sampled voting. When a
[validator](http://support.avalabs.org/en/articles/4064704-what-is-a-blockchain-validator) is
determining whether a
[transaction](http://support.avalabs.org/en/articles/4587384-what-is-a-transaction) should be
accepted, it asks a small, random subset of validators for their preference. Each queried validator
replies with the transaction that it prefers, or thinks should be accepted.

:::note

Consensus will never include a transaction that is determined to be **invalid**. For example, if you
were to submit a transaction to send 100 AVAX to a friend, but your wallet only has 2 AVAX, this transaction
is considered **invalid** and will not participate in consensus. 

:::

If a majority of the validators sampled reply with the same preferred

> transaction, this becomes the preferred choice of the group sampled, including the validator that asked.

Reviewer: We should change this. It's not the case that it becomes the preference of the validators sampled. Only the node that performed the sample's preference will change.

Also, it's not that a _majority_ of validators replied with the same preference. It's that a _quourum_ of them did. The quorum size is always at least 50%, but it can be configured to be higher. e.g. it might require 16/20

In the future, this validator and all those who have participated in at least one round of sampling

> will reply with the transaction preferred by the majority.

Author: @aaronbuchwald : 
This is not quite accurate. Does this need to be changed in this PR? The previous version was not quite correct either.

Votes are performed through vertices/blocks as opposed to transactions.

Additionally, validators maintain a confidence counter and do not immediately change their preference after a single poll in favor of a different container (transaction in the current text).

Author: @martineckardt do you have any materials written for the academy that could help me rephrase this section?

Reviewer 3: This doesn't need to be changed in this PR, this is a great first step

Author: @aaronbuchwald meaning this comment doesn't need to be addressed and we can include the current change in this PR, or I should remove these changes and push the rest?

Reviewer: Personally, I'd just omit this line entirely

> Overtime, more and more validators are queried, and the group in agreement grows larger and larger.

Reviewer: I'd omit this line. It's kind of begging the question. i.e. it's explaining how the consensus protocol works by saying "everyone comes to consensus"

Author: addressed

because in a given query, a node only queries `20` nodes, even if there are thousands of nodes in
the network.

Everything discussed to this point is how Avalanche is described in [the Avalanche
white-paper](https://assets-global.website-files.com/5d80307810123f5ffbb34d6e/6009805681b416f34dcae012_Avalanche%20Consensus%20Whitepaper.pdf).
The implementation of the Avalanche consensus protocol by Ava Labs (namely in AvalancheGo) has some
optimizations for latency and throughput.

### Blocks

A block is a fundamental component that forms the structure of a blockchain. It serves as a container
or data structure that holds a collection of transactions or other relevant information. Each block
is cryptographically linked to the previous block, creating a chain of blocks, hence the term "blockchain."

In addition to storing a reference of its parent, a block contains a set of transactions. These
transactions can represent various types of information, such as financial transactions, smart 
contract operations, or data storage requests.  

> If a node receives a vote for a block, it counts as a vote for all the transactions in a block.
> A block is accepted when all the transactions which are in it are accepted. If a block is rejected,
> any valid transactions are re-issued into a new block.

Reviewer: It's not actually strictly required that the transactions in a rejected block are put into a new block and reissued, though in practice we do that with all of our VMs. It's not part of Snowman consensus, it's a VM level decision.

```suggestion
If a node receives a vote for a block, it also counts as a vote for all of the block's ancestors (its parent, the parents' parent, etc.).
```

because in a given query, a node only queries `20` nodes, even if there are thousands of nodes in
the network.

> ### Vertices

Reviewer: Since we don't have any DAG chains anymore, we can just talk about blocks rather than about vertices.

low by adjusting system parameters. In Nakamoto consensus protocol (as used in Bitcoin and Ethereum,
for example), a block may be included in the chain but then be removed and not end up in the
canonical chain. This means waiting an hour for transaction settlement. In Avalanche,
acceptance/rejection are **final and irreversible** and only take a few seconds.

### Optimizations

It's not safe for nodes to just ask, "Do you prefer this block?" when they query validators.
In Ava Labs' implementation, during a query a node asks, "Given that this block exists, which

> of these blocks do you prefer?" Instead of getting back a binary yes/no, the node receives the other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
block do you prefer?" Instead of getting back a binary yes/no, the node receives the other
```

low by adjusting system parameters. In Nakamoto consensus protocol (as used in Bitcoin and Ethereum,
for example), a block may be included in the chain but then be removed and not end up in the
canonical chain. This means waiting an hour for transaction settlement. In Avalanche,
acceptance/rejection are **final and irreversible** and only take a few seconds.

### Optimizations

It's not safe for nodes to just ask, "Do you prefer this block?" when they query validators.
In Ava Labs' implementation, during a query a node asks, "Given that this block exists, which
of these blocks do you prefer?" Instead of getting back a binary yes/no, the node receives the other

> node's preferred set of blocks.

Reviewer: A node only prefers one block at a time for a given chain.
```suggestion
node's preferred block.
```

> Nodes don't only query upon hearing of a new block; They repeatedly query other nodes until there are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nodes don't only query upon hearing of a new block; they repeatedly query other nodes until there are
```

no blocks processing.

> Nodes may not need to wait until they get all _k_ query responses before registering the outcome of a
> poll. If no more blocks can get an α majority, then there's no need to wait for the rest of the
> responses. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nodes may not need to wait until they get all _k_ query responses before registering the outcome of a
poll. If a block has already received _alpha_ votes, then there's no need to wait for the rest of the
responses. 
```

### Big Ideas

Two big ideas in Avalanche are **subsampling** and **transitive voting**. 

Subsampling has low
message overhead. It doesn't matter if there are twenty validators or two thousand validators; the
number of consensus messages a node sends during a query remains constant.

Transitive voting, where a vote for a vertex is a vote for all its ancestors, helps with transaction
throughput. Each vote is actually many votes in one.

### Loose Ends

Transactions are created by users which call an API on the
[AvalancheGo](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego) full node or create them using a library such

> as [AvalancheJS](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchejs). Vertices are created when nodes batch

Reviewer: Again, would remove discussion of vertices
